...to talk about today,
and I'd just like to get a show
of hands just to see who has been
attending what and what kind of level of
WebObjects knowledge we have out there.
So if you could raise your hand if you
attended the Xcode keynote yesterday.
Great.
All right.
So everybody's interested in finding
out the latest great Xcode information.
So how many of you out there
are newbies and haven't used
WebObjects at all or even touched it?
Wow.
Okay.
So we have a lot of newbies out there.
Great.
So we'll definitely have a
little information for you
later in the presentation to
hopefully get you up to speed.
How many of you have used WebObjects
for about five years or less.
Less, yeah.
How about you grizzled veterans
have been using WebObjects when
it was in Objective-C or used
WebScript or something like that?
Wow.
Okay.
So I think we have a good
selection in the audience here,
and hopefully we can have enough
information for everybody today.
So what I'd like to start off with is
just give an overview of the WebObjects
technology and what kind of bits
and tools and frameworks are in it.
And then a little later,
I'll move on to more recent events,
what we've been doing and what
we plan to do in the future.
And then we'll move on to talking about
some other stuff like documentation and
other training materials and support
stuff that you can get a hold of.
So the first thing I'd like to
talk about are various rumors
that were floating around on the
net coming up to the conference.
Especially, you know,
a lot of people like to speculate
about what the next version of
WebObjects will have in there.
And so a lot of you guys think we
don't read the Apple mailing list,
but we do.
And a lot of times we're
very amused by your posts.
I recently saw a roadmap posted
for the next version of WebObjects,
and someone satirically did a takeoff
on our Direct-to-Star technologies.
And so for those of you who do
not know what Direct-to-Star is,
we use that to refer to our rapid
prototyping technologies and ways to
build applications within five minutes.
So someone did a takeoff on that,
and they posted one of the
features as Direct-to-Brain.
I'm not sure what that means,
except maybe we have cortical implants.
Maybe it'll code your app directly
to disk and deploy it or something.
I don't know, but I can safely say that
that is not a feature in the
next version of WebObjects.
direct to newest OS release was
another thing someone wanted.
Well, we just released
WebObjects 5.2.4 for Tiger,
so I think we're doing a
pretty good job in this area,
but we could probably try
to do a little better.
Direct to programming language.
Hey, we just announced an
Intel compiler for Fortran.
Why don't we move WebObjects to Fortran?
How about that?
How many Python users out there?
Maybe we'll move to Python.
I can safely say that WebObjects
is staying in Java and that is
our platform of choice and our
programming language of choice.
Direct-to-Customer Buzzword.
Our marketing guys love this,
and they would love for us to have
some kind of bot out there that
screen scrapes all the IT world or
e-weekly magazine and grabs the latest,
greatest buzzwords,
and somehow we get that into the product.
But somehow I don't think
that will be a feature,
but we try our best as far as
keeping up with the latest stuff.
And I think this is where most of
these features are going to end up,
which is directly on the mailing list.
And it's fun to speculate
what we're doing,
but I think that's most of these
features are going to end up there.
So what is in the next
version of WebObjects?
I'd like to kind of play off
that theme and kind of throw
out a few phrases myself.
Direct to customers.
So that somehow we're going to get
WebObjects in the hands of more people.
Direct to your wallet.
So Apple is going to be
putting money in your pocket,
whether you know it or not.
and direct-to-developer tools.
So what I'd like to do is just leave
you guys gnawing on those phrases.
I might, throughout the presentation,
drop a few Easter eggs here
and there as far as what's in
the next WebObjects release,
but what I'd like to do
is move on and talk about,
in general,
what is in the WebObjects technology,
what's in our bundle,
and what you can do with our tools.
So what is WebObjects?
It's a collection of tools and frameworks
that allow you to build Java application
servers and web services very easily.
Within the bundle,
we have an Xcode IDE that
is our IDE of choice,
and that's where you'll begin building
your projects and compiling your
code and manipulating your data.
We have a database mapping
tool called EOModeler,
and that does object relational mapping.
[Transcript missing]
And we have web services built
underneath everything and a
bunch of tools that allow you to
build web services very easily.
And we have a HTML page layout
application called WebObjects Builder.
And so we'll dive in a little
deeper in a few more minutes.
So a lot of you guys are familiar
with a lot of Java technologies,
I'm sure, and the J2E specifications,
and there's a whole laundry list of
technologies under that umbrella,
and how does WebObjects
kind of fit into this?
And I kind of like to
visualize it this way,
that WebObjects kind of wraps
a lot of these technologies,
and either we make it easier
to access those technologies,
or we provide equivalent technology
that you can accomplish the same thing.
And then we also integrate well
with some of these other things,
like Java mail and such,
and you can bolt that functionality
onto your application.
So why do we think WebObjects is cool?
We have very graphical tools
that allow you to access the
powerful frameworks that we have.
And really,
our frameworks have a lot of best
practices or a lot of code that you can
reuse or leverage to your advantage,
and that helps you build
your apps a lot faster.
We also scale very well.
WebObjects was architected to
be an enterprise application --
enterprise-level application server,
and there are quite a number of
examples of WebObjects deployments
that have scaled to huge heights,
including, like, our iTunes Music Store.
So where is WebObjects used?
We've seen a lot of people in our
core markets using WebObjects,
places like digital and print media,
asset management.
So I've seen an app recently that helped
people edit video and then annotate it
and log it and put it into a workflow for
people to edit and produce their videos.
And it's really cool.
So we've seen some
interesting apps in that area.
We've also seen people in higher
education building portal sites
or student information systems.
And that's definitely a
core market for Apple.
We're very interested in
our higher ed customers.
In the scientific and
technical community,
we've seen various biotech companies
building apps off of WebObjects.
And of course, us being Apple and this
being an Apple technology,
we want to eat our own dog food,
and we really do eat our own dog food.
So as an Apple employee,
I can't go a day without interacting
with a WebObjects application internally.
So as far as accessing my latest pay
stub or making my HR elections or
just checking bugs over RadarWeb,
you're accessing a
WebObjects application.
But we didn't stop there.
We have based our core business
and some of our most important
business off of WebObjects.
So places like the Apple online store,
we do hundreds of millions
of dollars of business.
It's a 24/7 operation.
And it's scaled very well
and it's international.
In .Mac,
we have a number of tool sets like
our web mail and iCards applications
that are also in WebObjects.
And of course, the million-pound gorilla
is the iTunes Music Store.
And we sell millions and
millions of songs a year.
I think Steve said we're closing in on,
you know, half a billion pretty soon.
And, you know, this is the gold
standard of music stores,
digital music stores in the industry.
And this is all based off of WebObjects.
And if there's any question
whether WebObjects can scale,
you just have to point
at the Music Store.
So let's talk about the
architecture really quickly.
As you can see from the graph,
it's very much a three-tiered
application server architecture.
So you have your data access layer,
and then you have in the
middle tier your app layer,
or where you put all your business logic,
and then you have a presentation layer,
or where your clients are
accessing your application from.
Another thing to note is that
there's a real clean separation
of function in this diagram,
and we really try to use the model view
controller design pattern and stick
to that concept within our designs.
So what's development workflow look like?
So usually you guys have a data
source that you'd like to access,
something that's relational
database usually.
And we allow you to access any
JDBC 2.0 compliant database that
has a JDBC driver available.
So things like Oracle, Sybase, MySQL,
they're all accessible as long
as you have those drivers.
We also allow you to access through
J&DI various directory services.
So things like OpenLDAP are accessible.
And what you'd start off with is
actually using our EOModeler application
and you'd model your data or you'd
blast a model onto your data source.
The next thing you would
do is go into Xcode,
build using some of
our default templates,
build an application,
start customizing it,
adding your custom Java business logic.
And then after that,
that's a jumping off point to
building other applications like
web-based applications and using
tools like our WebObjects builder.
But it doesn't stop there.
You can use those same components
and start building web services.
And again, you can use similar -- the
same components and build
Java desktop applications.
So when I say same components,
I'm saying that after building
a model and building some
of your custom app logic,
you can jump off and build all kinds of
different views or presentation layers
for your application and your business.
And that's a powerful concept.
We'll talk about that a little bit later,
but it helps you build
your business a lot faster.
So everyone has data they need to
access what goes on in our runtime.
What I like to think
WebObjects in particular,
our EO Enterprise objects
framework insulates you from
really having to write any SQL or
JDBC specific code to a data source.
We'll do all the heavy lifting for you.
And all you're really doing is you'll
need to specify a model file that
describes your tables and how they'll
map to objects within our frameworks.
And the typical workflow is that
our runtime realizes it needs
to access or fetch data from the
database or update or insert data.
It'll go into access the model
file that specifies that data.
It'll move on and
create a query for you to
access your data or commit
your data to the data source.
And then if you're fetching data in,
it will actually convert that
data into Enterprise objects.
And these objects are
very generic objects.
And what that means is in those
objects you don't care about
what's backing in the data store.
So you don't have any
database-specific information in there.
And let me just elaborate on
that concept a little bit more.
For instance,
if you had a model that pointed
to an Oracle data source and then
you had a model that pointed to a
MySQL data source and you had one that
pointed to an OpenLDAP data source,
when you need to access that
information into the runtime,
all those rows are
converted into objects.
And you don't care where
those objects came from.
You just manipulate them
through their getter and setter.
You just manipulate them through
their getter and setter methods.
And you don't care
what's in the back end.
We do all the lifting for you.
So to start off in building your model,
you would fire up our
EOModeler application.
And we have wizards that help you
reverse engineer your database
if you already have legacy data.
So we will discover all the tables,
all the columns and relationships
within your database.
Or you can go over and generate a
schema design yourself in your model and
then blast that onto your data source.
After you're done with that,
we have some templates,
Java template files that get you
started in customizing your code and
adding business logic to your objects.
So let me show you a
screenshot of Yield Modeler.
Hey, that doesn't look like the Yield
Modeler that you guys are used to.
Maybe this is what you're used to.
So here's a glimpse of maybe
something that's coming in the future.
So this is a version that
we shipped in the WebOx 5.2.
We can go back to that,
but we'll go there.
So like I said,
this is a very visual tool.
And you can see how
tables are represented,
and we call those EO entities.
And those are the big
rectangles right there.
And then within those tables or entities,
there are attributes.
And those attributes usually
represent columns in your database.
And then you can see number
of relationships between
these entities or tables.
And there are two one relationships
and too many relationships.
So that's a quick look at
what EO Modeler is about.
We'll discuss this a little
bit later in the presentation,
but hopefully that gives you a
flavor of what EO Modeler is.
Okay,
so back to our development workflow.
We have just finished our model.
We think we have our
schema the way we want it,
and we have just asked EOModeler
to build our business logic
code and give us a template.
We had fired up our Xcode IDE and
create a project and add all
that stuff into the project.
And then we'd start
prototyping our application.
And this is a very powerful concept
that most other systems like
J2E or other development systems,
you're spending a lot of
time in the design process,
making sure your schema
is the way you want it to.
Then you've got to code a lot of
your business logic into the app.
And then finally, you get to building
your presentation layer.
And this could be months down the
line before you're actually able
to show a client or a client.
Or to show how your app might
look or prototype your app.
And what we think is we have
a better way of doing things.
And so once you've modeled your data
and you've got your business logic,
we have rapid prototyping tools that
within minutes you can access your data,
manipulate your data,
and then you can begin to
refine your business logic.
So you can get feedback right away
whether your data source or your data is
modeled correctly or the way you want it.
You can get feedback right away.
And then you can refine
your business logic.
So instead of spending months down
the line in your development cycle,
you're getting right within
minutes access to your data
and you're working on that.
Another powerful thing is that since
we provide some default templates,
you're able to customize the way
your data is presented right away.
And we have very powerful tools to make
reusable components that you can embed.
And what that allows you to do is
build your interface a lot faster.
And so in the end, you end up with a very
polished application in a
fraction of an amount of time.
So hopefully you'll dig it a little bit
deeper into our rapid development tools
and our tool set and find out how fast
you can actually develop your apps.
So let's go back to our
development workflow and talk
about building web applications.
So WebObjects Builder is a
very graphical HTML editor.
And within there,
you're going to define how your data
binds to your interface objects,
or how it will be
presented within the HTML.
We provide you with a bunch of
reusable components in a pallet
that you can drag and drop into the
interface and then bind up and use.
There are also quite a number
of open source projects that
you can leverage information
from or their components from,
and things like Project Wonder have
been really good for the community.
So I encourage you to check that out.
So one important distinction
about using WebObjects,
our HTML templates,
or what we call WoW components,
is that we're really isolating
a lot of the logic and not
embedding that into the HTML layer.
And actually,
none of this is embedded in the page.
And that's a differentiation
factor with technologies like JSP,
where you're actually a lot of times
putting your business logic or your data
source information into your JSP code.
Another thing that's great and where
WebObjects has an advantage is that
we do all the session management
for you and we build sessions for
you and unique sessions to users.
You do not need to rebuild the widget,
the whole machine.
We'll take care of all that for you.
So it's very powerful and hopefully you
guys will realize how that is beneficial.
WebObjects can generate both HTML and
XML code within our components,
so it's very flexible.
We have interop with
other J2E technologies,
JSP.
If you want to use JSP technologies or
if that's part of your requirements,
it's certainly easy to add that to
your raw HTML code or create WebObjects
components that embed JSP code.
If you need internationalization,
it's easy to add localized
bundles to your Wo components.
And let me give you a preview of
what WebObjects Builder looks like.
Well, wait a second.
Now, this is what you guys are used to.
Or is it this one?
Okay, so maybe this gives you an idea of
something you might see in the future,
but this is what we
shipped on WebObjects 5.2.
And as you can see in the toolbar,
there are quite a number of
elements that you can add.
It's very graphical,
and it's very easy to bind
these components to your data.
And we'll get back to
this a little later.
So getting back to our
development workflow,
we can take our same model
that we built earlier,
we can use the same business
logic and all our customizations
for our business code,
and then we can start
building a web service.
So we're reusing these components
to build a web service.
What are web services?
They're a very standard way or a
standard protocol for communicating
between various clients and servers.
And it's kind of delivering on
the promise or has a lot of the
same kind of buzz around it that
Corba had a number of years ago,
interoperability between various systems.
So you can conceivably have an
Apple script server in the back
end and maybe a .NET client in
the front end or on the client
side consuming your web service.
And it's added a whole new
level of interoperability
between different systems.
So we think there's a whole class
of new programmers out there that
are learning how to build these
web services and learning this
kind of coding to these protocols.
And we're happy to be able to
add some of that functionality
into the WebObjects project.
So if I want to build a web
service on the server side,
the first thing I would do is fire
up our web services assistant.
And what that does is
allow you to graphically,
without writing a line of code,
actually configure a web service
and then actually test it.
So you're leveraging a lot of
things in our rapid prototyping
tools to get to that point.
And it's conceivable where you don't have
to ever type a line of XML or SOAP or
WSDL and you can publish a web service.
So we keep you out of all
the implementation details.
And let me just give you an idea of
how a web service might be configured.
So if you look at the graphic,
we have a real estate service defined.
And under that,
we have a search operation defined,
if you look on the left-hand side.
[Transcript missing]
So web services are built into
the 10 platform and they're very
integrated in there and there are
all kinds of clients you can build.
If you leverage the
WS make stubs tool utility,
you can build stubs for C or
C++ or Objective-C apps and
that can be your front end.
You can also use AppleScript or
Automator to be a client and
access web services that way.
And of course with Tiger,
the coolest kind of web service
client is the WebObjects.
So Web services are built into
the 10 platform and they're very
integrated in there and there are
all kinds of clients you can build.
If you leverage the WS make stubs
for C or C++ or Objective-C apps
and that can be your front end.
You can also use AppleScript or
Automator to be a client and
access web services that way.
And of course with Tiger,
the coolest kind of web service
client is the WebObjects.
Within WebObjects,
we have various APIs that allow you
to consume web services on the net.
So things like if you want to connect to
a service that you found on X methods,
it would be easy to define that
service and then suck that data
into your application and then
publish it through your app.
So that's web services in a nutshell.
Let me talk really quickly about how
to build Java desktop applications.
So if you decide to leverage
our rapid prototyping tools,
you can build a desktop
application really quickly.
And I think these are great for
building intranet applications
or admin applications where you
need to access your data and
manipulate your data really quickly.
And our direct-to-Java client assistant
allows you to customize how your desktop
app and how the data is presented to you.
And if you want to go into further,
deeper, or customize your app even more,
we have tools that you can use like
Interface Builder to build custom
widgets for swing widgets that you
can embed into your Java client apps.
We have Java Web Start integration and
we use JNLP files that allow you to
upload or define what classes to upload
to your client and help you version those
classes that are on your client so that
you can dynamically upload the latest,
greatest bits to your client machines.
And so that's really powerful.
So those are Java desktop applications,
and I encourage you to look at them.
So after you've built your latest,
greatest app and you're ready to deploy,
we have a couple of different options
for deploying WebObjects applications.
You can deploy in a J2E container,
or you can use our
traditional WebObjects tools.
Neither one is better or worse.
It just depends on your requirements.
If for some reason you need to
deploy in a J2E container like JBoss,
we have JBoss and Tomcat on Tiger Server,
you can build a .war bundle.
And .war bundles are the standard way of
building web applications and deploying
web applications within J2E containers.
And all you need to do is build
that bundle and then drop that
into the deploy directory and then
start using the configuration and
monitoring tools for that J2E.
So that's a great way to get
your application server to get
your application up and running.
Now,
we also have our WebObjects deployment
tools that are also on Tiger Server,
and those are also part
of the default install.
We have built-in clustering
support for them,
and there are a number of load-balancing
algorithms that you get to choose from.
We provide all the session
management facilities and automatic
restarting of app instances for you.
And there's a whole lot of
other configuration options
I can't get into right now,
but it's very powerful tools.
We also have monitoring tools that
allow you to remotely administer
and configure your applications,
and I encourage you to
check out Java Monitor.
So we encourage you to buy XSERVs.
They're our platform and hardware
deployment platform of choice.
We have unlimited deployment
licenses on every XSERV.
WebObjects deployment
becomes with every install,
so does JBoss and Tomcat and
any other deployment environment
you might want to deploy with.
[Transcript missing]
So let's talk about recent events,
what has been going on
in the WebObjects world.
So we released WebObjects 5.2.4
maybe about five or six weeks ago,
and that was with the Tiger release.
And it's really about a
compatibility release with Tiger.
It's supported on the Java 1.4.2 JVM.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so that's WebObjects 5.24.
Let me get back to--
My phrases I threw out there earlier.
So direct to customers,
direct to your wallet,
and direct to developer tools.
Any ideas what that means?
Or anybody got any feedback on that?
What they might think that is?
Well, I think I was trumped
yesterday by the keynote,
but--
Let me introduce WebObjects 5.3
for the Xcode 2.1 developer tools.
And that is WebObjects 5.3 is going
to be on every DVD that you guys
have gotten today or this week.
I encourage you to install them.
They're an optional install.
And we're really excited about
this because WebObjects has just
gotten more available to the
rest of the developer community.
And we think it's a pretty
exciting development.
And I would just stay tuned
for more information on that.
We also have a WebObjects 5.3
software update that's in the works.
It's not ready today,
but look for it in the upcoming weeks and
check your software updaters for that.
So WebObjects 5.3, what is in it?
So we've introduced an
Xcode ELModeler plugin,
and we really looked at what was going
on with core data modeling last year,
and we thought we could bring that
functionality to modeling ELModels.
We also updated WebObjects Builder.
We gave it a little bit of a facelift
and did some stuff under the hood.
A lot of feedback we got last year
after talking with you guys is
that we need to do something about
our HTML and XHTML compatibility.
So we've tried our best to
support the latest standards.
We also looked at our
Java Collection Classes support,
and we've added Collection Classes
support into Java Foundation Classes.
We've updated our web services
to improve interoperability
with various other clients.
And we've also added formal
qualification for Oracle 10G within
our WebObjects product.
So let's dive in a little bit.
So Xcode EOModeler plugin.
So last year we looked at the
cool integration features or
the core data modeling tool.
We thought that, hey,
this is great technology,
and we need to somehow bring that to EOF.
And so we took a stab at it,
and we think we've come up with
a pretty good core data modeler.
And hopefully you guys will like it.
We're intending on improving
this modeling tool,
and we'd love to get feedback
on if it suits your needs.
So this is the old EOModeler plugin,
or EOModeler application.
And here is the new EOModeler plugin.
And it looks very much more
integrated into the Xcode IDE.
And hopefully, it'll help improve your
workflow within applications.
So without further ado,
I'd like to invite
Jonathan Wrench up here,
and he's going to give us a
demo of the Xcode EOModeler
plugin and give us a tour.
Thank you, Daryl.
Hi, I'm Jonathan Wolf-Wrench,
and I'd like to introduce you to
the Xcode 2.1 EOModeler plugin.
Okay, I'm on screen.
That's going to open up
a simple project here,
pretty much empty,
except for the WebObjects
EO Model D document that comes
with the WebObjects distribution.
It's just a little movie sample here
that illustrates interrelationships
and some data model we all
can wrap our heads around.
So I'll double-click it.
First thing you'll notice is
that instead of opening up
EO Modeler in a separate process,
we are opening up the model
directly inside of Xcode.
So you can use this to view and edit
your model right inside of Xcode.
I want to point out the
four main views here.
On the top left corner,
you have the Entity View.
This is the view that lists
all the entities in your model.
Then, in the middle top here,
is the Properties View.
This is where it lists your entity's
attributes and relationships.
And finally,
in the top right corner here of
the top views is your Detail view.
This changes to detail
whatever you've selected.
[Transcript missing]
And the other thing you'll notice
is as I click on entities here,
that these top views are updating.
And it's both for entities
and for individual attributes
and relationships I click on,
which is a great way to navigate
your complex entity diagram.
So let me get -- Thank you.
We are pretty now.
I like to draw a little
bit more detail--draw your
attention to the detail view.
This is segmented control,
so there's a couple of layers here.
The first layer thing that
looks like a little EO here
in the side of the document,
that lists the object side of your EO.
So things like what--in this case,
we've selected an attribute,
so what value class is your attribute?
Is it a string?
Is it a Java number?
What is it?
Can it be null?
These type of object side of--object
side details of your entity.
Then on the little thing that looks
like a database cylinder here of the
same attribute is the details for
the persistence side of your entity.
So in this case,
we're still selecting the attribute.
So how does this attribute,
what column does it map
onto in your database?
And what type of column is that?
Is it integer or string or whatever?
So same thing when you
select a relationship.
So when you select a relationship,
the detail on the EO side would be,
is it a 2-1?
Is it a 2-many relationship?
What's the destination it goes to?
On the database side,
what happens when you
delete a set of related EOs?
What's your delete rule there?
And what type of joint semantic
does this relationship map onto?
And what does it represent?
So these are the things that you can set
in the new Xcode 2.1 EO Modeler plugin.
And that's it.
Back to slides.
Thank you, Daryl.
Thank you, Jonathan,
and hopefully this is a new wave
of -- a new generation of modeling,
EO models, and I think this is
going to be very cool,
and I think it adds just another
integration point for WebObjects within
Xcode and makes your life a lot easier.
Okay, so can we go back to slides?
So what other things
have we been working on?
HTML.
So last year,
I got a lot of feedback that
quite a number of you were
running post processing on our
HTML that we were creating just
because we were doing things that
were not up to the recent specs.
Or we're not doing things that
were compatible with XHTML.
Or even CSS.
We were mentioning people's CSS.
So we really wanted to address
this and work on compatibility.
So we looked at our tools and frameworks
and did what we could to bring it up
to the 4.01 specification for HTML.
We also did some work where we're not
munching CSS and we fixed known issues
with our XHTML compatibility story.
So things like double quoting
attributes or properly closing
some WebObjects tags we addressed.
So one area that we definitely
focused on was WebObjects Builder and
making sure that we were doing the
right thing in WebObjects Builder.
And we built in HTML 4.0.1 support
into all our components that we
create into our WebObjects tags.
And we also did what we could as
far as making our WebObjects tags
HTML compliant within WebObjects Builder.
We did give WebObjects
Builder a facelift,
so we thought we could reorganize
the toolbar and various other
elements and streamline your
workflow within the application.
And then we also added
a new preview mode.
So we've based it off of
WebKit and the WebKit view,
so what that gives you is
a better approximation.
It can now do CSS.
It can do JavaScript and run all that
stuff in the preview mode before.
Before,
we just couldn't display it or just would
not dynamically emulate your JavaScript.
So this is what the old
WebObjects builder looked like,
and it was quite busy and definitely
didn't look like a tiger application.
It actually harkens from the
OpenStep era of applications,
and there's a very busy toolbar,
and we thought we could do better.
And here is the new WebObjects Builder.
And as you can see,
we took a look at the toolbar,
and we may have simplified it
and hopefully concentrated on
various modes that you guys
are more apt to be working in.
So instead of having
me talk about all this,
I think I'll invite Jonathan up,
and we'll do a demo of the
new WebObjects Builder,
and he'll give us a tour.
So if we could go to the demo machine.
Thank you, Daryl.
I'm going to open up a simple
little project here that
contains an empty main.roa.
Fire up the new WebObjects 5.3.
I'm sorry, WebObjects Builder 5.3.
And let's hide that.
There we go.
So this is the new WebObjects builder.
First thing you'll notice is that
it has a more streamlined interface.
This is now a standard Cocoa toolbar.
It is, you know,
instead of the small little, you know,
set of open,
tiny little icons all over the place,
we've replaced that with a standard
Cocoa toolbar widget so you get things
like customization now to put those
elements that you use every day and
rearrange things to match your brain.
The previous pop-up mode pop-up
button has been replaced with a
segmented control that makes it more
obvious what mode you're currently in,
and it's easier to hit.
Um, in this--this elements pop-up
toolbar item is where-- that
lists all your static elements.
So things, uh--so in this case,
I've set a heading to h1 here.
So let's put a little sample text here.
Under the WebObjects toolbar
item is another pop-up that
lists your dynamic elements.
I could put things
like a repetition here.
We've freshened the interface
in a number of other places too,
instead of just the main window,
in addition to the main window.
The inspector has been
slightly refreshed.
Preferences have also been refreshed.
And the palette has also been freshened.
So the palette's a great way to
drag reusable components into your
WebOps application and just drop them
in and start using them right away.
Darryl Lee:
But beyond the interface tweaks
that we've added to this release,
the big news is that now we're
using WebKit to render the preview.
WebKit is the same engine used by Safari.
So this allows a richer preview
of how your component is going
to look on a real browser.
So things like XHTML, CSS, JavaScript,
they just work.
And to prove that to you,
I'm going to do something that
-- I'm going to load a page
that's fairly rich that uses CSS,
uses JavaScript,
and that's Apple's main web page.
I'm going to grab the
source code from that.
Copy it and paste it into WebObjects
Builder and move to preview.
Now, if you used to do this on the
previous WebObjects Builder,
well, you're braver than I am.
And you'll notice it just works.
Even the hot news headline here,
the JavaScript ticker here,
is firing like it should.
So this is a much higher fidelity
previewing experience for you to
work on your components and get
up to speed and make them right
before you even get to the browser.
Back to slides.
Thank you, Daryl.
So thank you, Jonathan,
and hopefully that gives you guys a taste
of what is in the new WebObjects builder.
And we're pretty excited about that,
and I encourage you to try it
out and give it a test drive.
So other things we've been working on.
So I can't remember how many years
I've heard of that people want
Java collection classes interfaces
implemented within Java Foundation,
and in particular, NSArray, NSDictionary,
and NSSet.
So as of today, in WebObjects 5.3,
we have implemented those
interfaces within NSArray,
NSDictionary, and NSSet.
And they implement the list, map,
and set interfaces.
So we'd love to get feedback and find
out what kind of needs you guys have.
Hopefully,
this gives you better interoperability
with other Java packages and allows you
to exchange our Java collection classes,
Java Foundation collection
classes with other packages.
And we'd love to get feedback on
anything else that you'd like for
us to add into our frameworks.
So web services.
WebObjects 5.2 shipped with Axis
1.0 as its underlying engine.
And so we looked at it and we said,
you know, we need to make some
improvements in this area.
So we looked for the latest GM release
of Axis and Axis 1.1 is the latest.
So we've embedded that
into WebObjects 5.3.
And we're hopeful that that gives you
a better level of interop with other
services and gives you more performance.
So I'd like to invite Jonathan up here.
And we thought we'd show a
little web service integration
between WebObjects and Dashboard.
So Jonathan, why don't you come up here?
Jonathan Allen: Thank you, Darryl.
Let's close up this previous demo.
I'm opening up a small little project
here I wrote and it's started running.
So dashboard widgets are those
HTML pages with JavaScript logic.
And it turns out that WebObjects
is a great HTML environment.
Furthermore, dashboard widgets,
when they want to communicate
with the outside world,
they use web services.
And guess what?
WebObjects is a great web
services server and client.
So they really go together well.
And so I whipped up this demo to
show you how a dashboard widget
can talk to a WebObjects back end.
And here I'm playing off the
-- you guys -- how many guys
have seen the WWC trading cards?
There was this little thing here
that someone took the front page
of the WWC developer promotion,
and they took the various
engineers and said,
"Wait a minute.
Those almost look like trading cards."
So they whipped up a set of trading
cards for the various Apple engineers.
So this dashboard widget
allows you to maintain and
categorize your trading cards.
So if you want to get all
your information on Bertrand.
Or if you want to, you know,
what's going on with Spotlight?
Who should I talk to?
Maybe I should talk to Jan there.
So this is a dashboard widget that's
talking to a web services application,
which is a WebObjects application.
So as I type here,
it starts narrowing down what
I could be talking about.
So let me tell you what's
going on behind the scenes.
This is an NS Search Field Enhanced.
Remember,
dashboard widgets are thus HTML.
So this is HTML interface
you're looking at here.
In order to get the look and the
interaction of the search field here,
is that this is an
NS Search Field Enhanced
input text box element.
And what it is,
is tied to a JavaScript method.
And every time I type
in another character,
a JavaScript method is fired.
That JavaScript method takes what
I've typed into the query box,
turns it into a HTTP request,
throws it over to my
WebObjects application.
My WebObjects application takes that
request with the query string and
puts it into a fetch specification.
And at that point,
my WebObjects application is done.
The WebObjects framework picks
up the fetch specification,
dynamically generates
database-specific SQL and hands
it over to an open database.
Open base looks at the query,
turns it into a bunch of SQL rows,
hands it back to the
WebObjects framework.
The WebObjects framework
takes these SQL rows,
turns them into objects for me,
and hands them to my application.
At this point,
my application just has these objects
that happen to match the query.
And all my application does
at that point is turn those --
serialize those objects into XML.
And without any code,
we're able to do that.
Then the XML is thrown back to
the widget in the HTTP response.
The widget, now back in JavaScript,
takes the -- the HTML response,
and then it takes the SQL response,
and then the XML breaks it apart and
uses that information to manipulate the
DOM to update our HTML user interface.
And that happens with each keystroke.
So if you're interested in core image or
maybe you're interested in core video,
who do I talk to for this?
Oh, if it helps, I spell video right.
And, or maybe, you know,
Core Data is kind of cool, too.
So, who's that?
Ted.
So, that's Dashboard Widget,
using web services to talk
to a WebObjects application
that's database-backed.
Web services are how widgets
talk to the outside world,
and WebObjects makes web services easy.
Thank you.
So, thank you, Jonathan.
So, dashboard widgets are really cool
and WebObjects is cool and hopefully
you guys can create some cool widgets
that access your applications data.
So, hopefully that gives you some
ideas of what you can do with
WebObjects and Dashboard.
So here's the WebObjects
5.3 compatibility matrix.
I'm not going to go into
all the details here,
but we're going to be
posting that online,
and you can check out all the latest,
greatest support for that.
So that's WebObjects 5.3.
We're pretty excited about it.
We're happy to be on the developer
tools and shipping with Xcode 2.1.
Look for us in the future
to ship WebObjects releases
through the developer tools.
We've posted our compatibility online,
and you can check out
all that information,
or you can absolutely drop
by our WebObjects lab and ask
us more questions about that.
WebObjects 5.3 is available now.
So you have it in your hands and
we've shipped it at the conference.
It's also available through ADC download
and I encourage you to go grab it.
WebObjects 5.3 for
Tiger Server will be shipping soon,
so look for that in the upcoming weeks.
So that's WebObjects 5.3.
What are we looking for forward into
the future and what are we going to do?
So being part of the
developer tools release,
we're obviously going to integrate
tighter with the Xcode IDE and we're
going to look for new ways of improving
workflow through our tool chain.
We're going to look forward to
improving the EO Modeler plugin
and making that more usable.
We'd love to get feedback
from you guys for the latest,
greatest features that
you'd like to see in there.
WebObjects Builder.
We are looking for new ways
of improving workflows through
that and improving experience,
seeing if we can leverage WebKit more
and various other components.
Further down the line,
we're going to look into our
deployment story and monitoring story.
And it's been difficult in the past to
get all the information you guys needed
out of our frameworks at deployment time,
and we want to assist you guys as far as
instrumenting your applications in your
deployment environment and providing more
information and feedback on what's going
on within your deployment environment.
Whenever Java 1.5 becomes the
default JVM on client and server,
we will look into supporting and fully
qualifying WebObjects on that JVM.
There's lots of things to look
forward to in the next year,
and hopefully next year at WDC we'll
have lots of good things to show you.
We're very happy about that.
So I'd like to invite Katherine Wentz up,
and she'll talk to us a little bit
about WebObjects documentation.
Hi, I'm Catherine Wentz.
I'm the Technical Publications
Manager for WebObjects.
And this morning I'd like to talk
to you about a couple of things.
I'd like to talk to you about the
documentation that we have available
today for WebObjects 5.3 and what
you'll be seeing in coming months.
On the website today at
the ADC Reference Library,
we have the WebObjects 5.3 release notes.
And that explains new features,
resolved issues,
known issues in their workarounds,
and that's available today.
Let's see, we have the WebObjects 5.3
reference in Java doc format.
We have the WebObjects 5.3 update,
which explains the API differences
between WebObjects 5.2.4 and 5.2.5.
3.
Now those of you who go to
the ADC Reference Library on a
regular basis know that we update
the documents there monthly.
So in the coming months
you'll see some changes.
We'll be revising some existing
documents to reflect new
WebObjects 5.3 functionality.
We'll be retitling and
recategorizing some documents.
And we'll also be replacing
some outdated documents.
Project Builder screenshots will become
Xcode screenshots and books such as,
yes, Project Builder for WebObjects,
they'll be going away.
All the Xcode specific information
for WebObjects will be in
the Xcode documentation set.
So some specific titles you'll
be seeing in the coming months.
You'll see a new Getting Started with
Web Applications.
That will have an updated learning path
to reflect the new titles and categories.
We'll also be making some other changes.
We'll be taking larger existing documents
and breaking them down into shorter,
more cohesive documents.
So a chapter that's currently a
tutorial in one of the large books,
it'll become a separate tutorial.
A chapter that explains
how to use a tool,
it'll become a separate user guide.
And a chapter that introduces
technology will become an overview.
So in the coming months,
look out for a new WebObjects overview,
a new WebObjects Web Applications
Programming Guide,
and new WebObjects tutorials.
How many of you have been to the
ADC Reference Library recently
and seen the new documentation
feedback form at the bottom of each
page and used it to send feedback?
Oh, good.
I have a captive audience.
I can tell about something new.
It's called the
Did This Document Help You?
And it's a quick and easy
way to provide documentation
feedback directly to tech pubs.
You can give us feedback
in one of three ways.
Yes, it was helpful.
Tell us how it helped.
It was helpful,
but maybe you found a typo.
Maybe there was a mistake
in the sample code.
Maybe, you know, you just needed some
additional information.
So tell us more about that.
And then, no, it wasn't helpful.
So tell us what would have helped.
I strongly encourage you to use
this new documentation feature.
It's a great way to get
feedback back to us.
In closing, you now know more about the
WebObjects 5.3 documentation.
We've covered the documentation set,
both present and future.
And now you all know about this
Did This Document Help You?
feature.
Thanks for your time.
I'll be available throughout the week at
the conference to answer any questions.
I'll also be at the
WebObjects feedback session.
And thanks for your time again.
Back to you, Darryl.
Thank you, Kathleen.
So lots of good things coming
up with WebObjects documentation
and lots of different books
that are going to be refreshed.
So we'll have the latest and
greatest information for you.
So we have a whole bunch of other
WebObjects sessions that you
guys can attend this week and
especially today we have a number
of sessions later on this afternoon.
We have a WebObjects tool session and
I would encourage a lot of you newbies to
come to that session and get an idea of
how all our tool chain interacts together
and get more hands-on with our tools.
Immediately following that we have
a WebObjects deployment session and
how to deploy into J2E containers
and so that would be another good
session for you guys to explore
if you haven't gone through the
deployment process with WebObjects.
We have a lab on Wednesday morning,
so I encourage you to
attend that and give us,
bring any questions or bring your code
and show it to us and hopefully we can
help you out with any problems you have.
Later on in the week,
I think it's on Friday,
we have a WebObjects performance
and optimization session.
And I would definitely encourage
all of you to go to that.
We'll have a number of iTunes
music store engineers here,
and they're going to share all kinds of
war stories and best design practices,
et cetera, on designing your
WebObjects applications.
And then later that day,
we have a WebObjects feedback forum,
and I can tell that a number of you
guys are going to be showing up there.
Thank you.
So another thing to point out is that
we have training available for you.
If you log on to training.apple.com,
there are a couple WebObjects classes.
I believe the curriculum
was refreshed last year.
And so look into the internet application
development using WebObjects and
advanced WebObjects development classes.
And I hear they're great.
So who to contact?
Send some email to webobjx@apple.com
and hopefully we can respond
to any of your questions and
get any information you need to.